# 2017-10-15  William A. Hudson

# rpixel -- Man page
#---------------------------------------------------------------------------
# See also:  perlpod(1)  perlpodstyle(1)

=head1		NAME

rpixel -- FPGA data transfer on Raspberry Pi

=head1		SYNOPSIS

 rpixel [options]
  output forms:  (default is none)
    --stream=N          stream N pixels at a time to CSV output
    --csv               CSV format
    --tab               tabular format
    --tab2              tabular format, no check
    --hex               hex data dump
    --raw               raw hex data
    --delta             delta data in decimal
    --flag              octal flags with 8-bit data in hex
  raw data:  one sample per line, with headline
    --load=FILE         load hex words from file
    --save=FILE         save hex words to   file
  options:
    --npix=N            number of pixel to collect
    --repeat=N          repeat data read loop N times
    --frame=0           align to frame mark, +1= rising, -1=falling
    --help              show this usage
    --man               show manpage and exit
  # -v, --verbose       verbose output
    --debug             debug output
  (options with GNU= only)


=head1		DESCRIPTION

Transfer data from an FPGA Fifo buffer to this program running on a
Raspberry Pi3.

=head2			Setup

The GPIO pin directions must be initialized external to this program.
On reboot, the RPi (Raspberry Pi) sets all pins to Input, thus it is really
only necessary to set Output pin directions.
Use the 'gpio' utility command provided by default in the RPi Raspbian
distribution:

    % gpio readall              # view all pin configuration
    % gpio -g mode  5 out       # GoPixel
    % gpio -g mode  6 out       # ReadAck (required)
    % gpio -g mode  7 out       # nReset
    % gpio -g mode  8 out       # TrigOut

Companion script 'rpixel_init' does this.

The ReadAck output signal is essential for handshake with the FPGA fifo.
The other outputs (nReset, GoPixel, and TrigOut) are optional and need not
be configured if they are not used by the FPGA.  Regardless, 'rpixel' will
toggle these GPIO output register bits.

The resistor pull up/down need not be configured in any special way.
Note the RPi does remember the resistor pull setting thru power down.
It is best to not fiddle with these.

See:  doc/rpixel.text  User Guide for GPIO pin connections to FPGA.

See:  src/rpixel.cpp  for GPIO pins used by this program.


=head2			Essential Operation

The following steps comprise the essential operation.

1a)  Flush fifo:  By reading 10000 samples in a tight loop, ignoring the
NoData signal.
The last sample is checked and a Warning issued if the fifo was not empty
(NoData=0).

1b)  Find first frame mark:  Only if requested with --frame.
Discard samples until MarkY makes a rising transition with --frame=+1, or
falling with --frame=-1.

1c)  Find first coefficient:  Discard samples until coefficient 0 is found.

2)  Collect the dataset in memory:  The number of samples in the dataset is
defined as ( --npix pixels * 16 coefficients/pixel * 4 samples/coeff ).
This inner loop repeatedly reads the GPIO pins, discarding invalid samples
where NoData=1.  Valid samples are stored in a memory array as raw 12-bit
values.  There are
no other IO operations in this loop, thus avoiding potential process blocking
on IO.
This step is timed in nano-seconds (ns) using the Linux CLOCK_MONOTONIC_RAW
timer (see clock_gettime(3)).

3)  Output statistics on stderr.

4)  Repeat loop:  Steps 1 to 3 are repeated --repeat=M times.  The memory
array contents are overwritten each time, so only the last repetition is
available for output.  This is primarily used to let the rpixel process
settle down (perhaps for more efficient running with shorter process sleeps)
and to see statistics from each repetition.

5)  Output data on stdout:  The memory data is formatted and output for each
output form option.  The memory is not cleared, so the same data can be
output in multiple forms.

Option --stream=N works differently, in that output of N pixels is done
as part of the inner loop of step (2) instead of the normal output in
step (5).
This allows --npix to be arbitrarily large, since only --stream number of
pixels are stored in memory.


=head2			Data Array Size

The in-memory data array size is hardcoded in the 'yFramDat' class constructor
(see file src/yFramDat.cpp).  The constant 'sz' (const int sz) is the maximum
number of entries in the data array.  Change the value and re-compile.

The array is type (unit16_t) and consumes 2 bytes/entry.  One pixel requires
64 entries in the array (16 coeff/pixel * 4 nibble/coeff * 1 entry/nibble).
Thus typical image sizes require:

     256x256   --npix=65536    sz=  4 M entries,   8 Mbyte
     512x512   --npix=262144   sz= 16 M entries,  32 Mbyte
    1024x1024  --npix=1048576  sz= 64 M entries, 128 Mbyte

Size limitation is the amount of free RAM on the RPi that can be used without
swapping to disk (the SD card).  Swapping may incur process sleeps, possibly
resulting in fifo OverFlow and lost data.  Excessive swapping may wear out
the SD card.  Use the free(1) command to display the amount of free and used
memory in the system.

The Raspberry Pi-3 has 1 Gbyte of RAM.  Data array size of 256 Mbyte
(128 M entries) was tested and seems to work fine.  No testing to find failure
limit has been done (as of 2018-02-25).


=head1		OPTIONS

=head2			output forms

These options specify the format of the output data stream on stdout.
Zero or more may be combined (except --stream).
With no output option nothing is output on stdout, useful to see only the
statistics on stderr.

=over

=item B<--stream=N>         - Stream N pixels at a time to CSV output.

As described above.
Output format is the same as --csv.
No other output options may be combined with --stream.
The idea was to stream output while making as little impact on the inner
loop as possible.

=item B<--csv>              - Output CSV format.

=item B<--tab>              - Output tabular format.

These are the primary output forms.  Columns are:  (left to right)
Index is a pixel number, counting from zero.
Ym,Xm are the verticle and horizontal scan mark signals, binary 0/1 values.
Coefficient columns (named c0, c1, .., c15) are signed 16-bit decimal values.

=item B<--hex>              - Hex data dump.

Output a hex dump table, 16-bit big-endian data values.
Eight data column follow an address index column on the left.
There is a two-line heading for the columns.

=item B<--raw>              - Raw hex data.

Output raw data as 16-bit hexadecimal words, with index, one line per word.
There is a one-line heading for the columns.

=item B<--delta>            - Delta data in decimal.

Output raw data as 16-bit word in unsigned decimal, with an index and delta
column.  The delta is the difference in value from the previous entry.
There is a one-line heading for the columns.
Primarily used for debug in early development.

=item B<--flag>             - Octal flags with 8-bit data in hex.

This is the primary debug output form.
Output raw data as 8-bit hex words with flag bits, index, and delta.
Delta is in decimal (current - previous).
Flags are 4-bits in octal, with leading zero.  Bit position values are:
    001 MarkX scan mark
    002 MarkY scan mark
    004 OverFlow (fifo write_full)
    010 NoData (fifo empty)

=back

=head2			raw data

=over

=item B<--load=FILE>        - Load hex words from file.

=item B<--save=FILE>        - Save hex words to   file.

These options allow the raw data array to be loaded/saved in text form,
mostly for debug and testing, but there may be other uses.
They can be combined with any of the output forms, and are processed in this
order:  --load, --save, then memory outputs --tab, --csv, etc.
File format is hexadecimal, one 16-bit value per line.
First line is a headline, which may be null.

=back

=head2			options

=over

=item B<--npix=N>           - Number of pixel to collect.

This is the total number of pixels to collect in step (2) above.
The total number of valid transfers will be ( --npix * 16 coeff/pixel *
4 transfers/coeff ), and may be truncated to the data array size.
Without --stream, all transfers will be to memory.
With --stream, only --stream number of pixels need fit in memory.

=item B<--repeat=N>         - Repeat data read loop N times.

This is the number of repetitions of the outer repeat loop of step (4) above.

=item B<--frame=0>          - Align to frame mark, +1= rising, -1=falling.

Wait until the beginning of a frame, as in step (1b) above, before collecting
pixels.
With --frame=0 (default) alignment is disabled (e.g. for when there are no
scan mark input signals).
Requires the MarkY input signal.
This is most useful when collecting a full frame to limited memory.

=item B<--help>             - Show command usage and exit.

=item B<--man>              - Show manpage and exit.

These are the primary documentation.

=item B<-v, --verbose>      - Verbose output.  (Not used)

=item B<--debug>            - Debug output.

Output extra debug info, possibly on stdout.

=back


=head1		RETURN VALUE

0= success, otherwise errors


=head1		EXAMPLES

 Just show statistics for 2000 pixels repeated 3 times.
 % rpixel --npix=2000  --repeat=3

 Output tabular data.
 % rpixel --tab

 Output CSV data for 2000 pixels.
 % rpixel --csv  --npix=2000

 Stream pixels to CSV output in chunks of 10 pixels.
 Note number of pixels can be arbitrarily large.
 % rpixel --stream=10  --npix=2000000

 Align data to falling edge of MarkY.
 % rpixel --frame=-1  --csv

 Output raw data with flag field in octal.  Useful for debug.
 % rpixel --flag

 Output the collected memory image in multiple formats.
 % rpixel --tab --csv --flag

 Save raw data to a file for later loading, and output CSV format.
 % rpixel --save=outfile.raw  --csv

 Load raw data and output it in table format.
 % rpixel --load=infile.raw  --tab

 Show default options.  Is a hidden test option.
 % rpixel --TESTOP

 Check free memory while rpixel is running.
 % rpixel --npix=2000000 --repeat=4 &
 % free


=head1		TOUBLESHOOTING

=head2			GPIO pins not connected

A faulty GPIO pin connection can result in an apparent hang, erratic operation,
or bad data.  Visually inspect for loose connections.

=head2			ReadAck pin direction is not Output

With no ReadAck signal, the FPGA fifo will not advance to the next output
entry, and the input data will appear to be constant.  This may result in
a hang in finding the first coefficient in step (1c) above.

Verify with utility command 'gpio readall'.
Set correct directions with 'rpixel_init'.

=head2			OverFlow errors

If the FPGA fifo overflows, then no new entries can be inserted in the fifo
and are lost.  This typically results in "misaligned coeff nibble" errors.
Overflow is used as a cross check for possible bad data, and is not intended
to be a recoverable condition.

Inspect stderr for statistics and error messages, e.g.:
    OverFlow= 4
    Error:  Fifo overflow count= 4

=head2			/dev/gpiomem access permisions

This device special file is used to access the GPIO interface which appears
as registers in the ARM processor IO address space.
This may result in errors like "can't open /dev/gpiomem" and program exit
with non-zero exit code.
File permission should be read-write for group 'gpio', and your user ID
should belong to group 'gpio', e.g inspect:

    % ls -l  /dev/gpiomem
    crw-rw---- 1 root gpio 243, 0 Nov  7 12:42 /dev/gpiomem
        ^^            ^^^^
    % id
    uid=1000(pi) gid=1000(pi) groups=1000(pi),...,997(gpio),...

=head2			Bad signal level on GPIO pins

This may result in flaky behavior or hang.
In one case, the NoData signal had a bad low level input voltage of Vil= 1.2 V,
due to a likely damaged FPGA output pin driver (it should have been well below
0.4 V).  This was very near the CMOS input low threshold of ~1.1 V
(typicaly 1/3 * Vcc, at Vcc=3.3 V on the RPi).
The result was some valid data transfers being interpreted as NoData=1 and
discarded, causing "misaligned coeff nibble" errors.

Use an oscilloscope and verify good 3.3V CMOS input signal levels, typically
(0.0V <= Vil <= 0.4V) and (3.1V <= Vih <= 3.3V).


=head1		ENVIRONMENT

none


=head1		FILES

 /dev/gpiomem	Kernel memory map for parallel GPIO pins.
    Allows access for normal users belonging to group 'gpio'.

=head1		SEE ALSO

In the source directory tree:

 doc/rpixel.text	User Guide.  Pin connections.
 src/rpixel.cpp		Main program, table of GPIO pins used.
 bin/rpixel_init	Initialize Raspberry Pi gpio for use with rpixel.

B<clock_gettime>(3)
B<free>(1)

=cut

